[THEME MUSIC]
>> The dark knight of the soul
is defined as a time that comes
in almost everyone's life--
unless you're very fortunate--
when everything that you've
ever loved or held dear is gone.
You might come home someday
and your family, your job,
your house, your car,
everything is gone.
And in that moment, we're
pushed to the very edge
of who we believe we are.
>> Is it possible that you and
I are praying the wrong way?
I don't know, sometimes
I wonder because I
don't get my prayers answered.
We're going to find out
more about that today.
We have Gregg Braden who
is the author of "Walking
Between The Worlds,"
and we're going
to talk about prayer today.
Welcome to the show.
>> It's a pleasure to be here.
Thank you, Corinne.
>> First of all, before
we get into prayer,
I just wanted to get everybody's
attention there because we all
worry about whether
we're doing it right.
>> You got my attention.
>> OK.
Tell us a little bit about
yourself and your work,
and what you're particularly
interested in now.
>> My passion in this moment
is finding the language
and the means to share what I
believe is a very relevant body
of information, although it is
very ancient at the same time,
some of the information was lost
to the west over 1,700 years
ago.
Bringing this body
of information
to bear, to provide a context
and framework within which
to view all of the outrageous
social, political, economic,
natural phenomenon that we're
seeing in our world today.
And to move through
those changes with grace.
>> What was lost, Gregg?
>> 1,700 years ago,
in the year 325 AD,
there were tremendous pieces of
our most sacred heritage that
were taken from our texts.
And clearly, this
transcends religion.
This is historical information,
although much of it
was recorded in what later
became biblical texts.
We know that at
least 25 books were
lost from our biblical text, at
least 20 additional documents.
And the ones that
were left were poorly
translated into the
languages of the west.
At later time, I
like to call it maybe
we got the Reader's
Digest condensed version
because you can literally
take the ancient texts
and our modern version,
place them side by side,
and see what we may have the
first, the last sentence,
and the good stuff in between
in many cases is missing.
>> So where is it?
Is it being found now?
>> Well, it's interesting.
It's the basis of
the Dead Sea Scrolls,
maybe one of the
reasons why we're not
being allowed to see the
scrolls, the translations,
and their entirety.
Some of them were
copyrighted in 1993.
It is also found--
a body of information this
solid and this relevant,
I knew would never be
left to a single people
in the single text.
I expected to see it in
many different places.
And as we've searched, we have.
We've found that in the great
libraries of St. Catherine's
Monastery in Mt.
Sinai.
We've found it in Ethiopia.
We've found it certainly
in the Nag Hammadi Library.
We've found it in indigenous
North and South American
traditions, as well as in some
of the great libraries of what
today are Central Tibet.
>> Tell us about your
recent trip to Tibet.
What happened?
>> Well, it was an
amazing journey.
In April of this year, of '98,
I had the opportunity to journey
with a small group
into Central Tibet
for the purpose
of what I believed
would be to identify fragments
of this ancient wisdom that
had been carried in
the Tibetan traditions
and preserved through
their isolation.
The Ancient Essenes,
the authors of Dead Sea
Scrolls in the
Qumran Area, we know
dispersed 500 years
after the crucifixion
into many parts of the world,
and Tibet was certainly
one of those.
The intent was rather than
speculating through a written
text what may be inferred
was to actually speak
to those people who were
living those traditions
and saying to them in the
matter of prayer, for example.
Now that we have seen your
tones, and your chants,
and your mudras that you're
doing on the outside,
what happened to
you on the inside?
What were you doing
when we witnessed those?
And through our guides
and our interpreters,
there were 15 monasteries
and nunneries.
We had the opportunity to
interact with these people.
And lo and behold, they
validated my suspicion
that they were actually
living fragments
of these Ancient Essene
traditions, this wisdom that
was lost 1,700 years ago.
>> Were there any texts there?
>> Well, yes, there
were many texts.
We were there three weeks,
altitudes over 17,500 feet
in the Himalayas.
>> Slept a lot.
>> I live 8,000 feet in
the northern New Mexico
in the mountains.
And this 17,000 feet,
it's a different world.
What we discovered,
some of the highest,
least disturbed monasteries
through a series of very
heartfelt interactions with
the monks that were there,
they shared with
us their libraries
that actually of all the
things that Tibetans represent
to us as anchors of
compassion, love, and wisdom,
they're tremendous
record keepers.
And they don't
judge the records.
They have Christian records
as well as Buddhist records
as well as the records of
their ancient traditions.
They didn't lose that
information 1,700 years ago.
So from their
perspective, they know
that this is a rare precious
moment in human history
and that compassion is so key.
And that there is an
ancient technology that
lives within each of us
that has a direct impact,
a direct linear
measurable impact
on the outcome of the events
in the world around us.
Today, we call that
technology prayer.
>> So this is what was
in the text that we lost?
>> Many of the texts.
And when I speak about prayer.
Prayer, it's a very
personal thing.
It means different things
to different people.
Western researchers today
identify four modes of prayer
that we use either alone or
in some combination with one
another.
Ancient traditions
have always described
another mode that didn't seem
to fit into any of those.
And it led me to
ask the question,
is there another mode?
Is there a fifth mode
or lost mode of prayer?
From our time in
Tibetan from these texts
and the ancient scholars, what
we know as the answer to that
is yes.
>> But the way--
we found that the
way I pray if I say,
God, I know you're very busy.
So I know this is the problem.
And by the way, God,
this is the answer.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> [LAUGHS] And by the way, I
don't want to bother you with.
Just get it for me.
I mean, that's the
way most of us pray.
We tell God what to do.
>> In the Western traditions,
many of our prayers are prayers
of asking where we are
conditioned to feel powerless
in a situation or helpless and
we ask for divine intervention
or we petition that
something come to pass.
The four modes of prayer
is the colloquial prayer,
a petitionary prayer,
a ritualistic prayer,
and meditative prayer.
And this mode of prayer is so
clearly different than those.
It's a prayer that is based
in the emotion and the feeling
that the prayer has already
come to pass rather than asking
that something happen.
I'll back up just a little
bit and give some examples.
When we're asking that something
come to pass, please God,
let my car get to the
Texaco station at 2 o'clock
in the morning before
it runs out of gas.
This once, I'll
never do this again.
OK, that's an asking.
We're implying that it
doesn't have gas in the tank.
So in our asking, our
prayers for global peace,
we're saying maybe that
peace doesn't exist right now
and perhaps unknowingly
perpetuating that state
of affairs on the one hand.
The lost mode of prayer,
rather than using the logic
in the thought, invites us to
come from a place of emotion
that our prayers have
already been fulfilled,
that peace already
exists in the world,
that gas is already
in that tank.
>> This is interesting because
what you're saying is that
the universe is pretty
neutral, that it will answer us
according to the vibration
that we put out there.
>> This is the beginning
of an ancient technology.
It was relegated to priesthood
into the mystery schools
1,700 years ago.
Prior to that time, apparently,
the average man in the street
knew this.
And for whatever
reason, the year 325 AD,
we began to forget.
And my question is
when did we begin
to believe that to
create in this world,
that we would have to ask that
come to pass on the one hand
rather than having the thoughts,
feelings, and the emotions
to allow creation to
build our hearts desire?
And clearly, this
mode of prayer,
it's not a wish machine,
it's not a mind control,
it's not leaving our
will on anything else.
It simply creates the pattern,
the template of a possibility
and allows that possibility
then to come to fruition.
>> So you really have to back
up when you say something like
this--
>> Yes.
>> --to the point that we are
actually part of the creative
energy.
>> We have, had, always,
and have today direct access
to the creative forces of our
world through a language that
until recently has been
poorly understood in the west.
That language is the union of
thought, feeling, and emotion,
which is so
fascinating, Corinne,
because in the
west, emotion, we've
done our best to get around
it, to get around the feelings
and emotions.
So we are a very logic
mental-based societies.
When you see old movies of
people praying or doing,
exercising their
powers, their thinking,
their faces are scrunched up and
they make it look really hard.
It's a thought process
and we're invited
to incorporate the feeling
and the emotion into those.
And there is a quality of
thought, feeling, and emotion,
that union, then that
allows our hearts
desire to come to fruition.
And this is the language
of the ancients.
And in the ancient
text, it's called
the language of the angels.
>> So this is almost
when you pray,
it's almost like
playing let's pretend.
You not only pray but you
see it already happened.
>> Can you give me an example?
>> Not yet.
>> OK.
>> We're going to take a little
break now but we want to hear
more about this because we all
want to find out how to get
what we want.
We're talking to
Gregg Braden here
who is the author of
"Walking Between The Worlds".
We're really walking
between the worlds today.
And you don't want to miss,
though we had to do this.
Stay with us, we'll
be right back.
[THEME MUSIC]
We're talking to Gregg
Braden here about his book,
"Walking Between The Worlds".
And we're talking
today about prayer.
All right, I want to
give you an example.
All right, you have a
child who's very sick
and you're praying to
god that he gets well.
This is the way we usually pray.
Please, God, spare my child.
Get him well.
Get them feeling good.
Help me to have the strength
to take care of him.
That's the usual prayer.
>> Yes.
>> How would you change that?
>> I'll answer that question and
I'd like to share an example--
>> OK
>> --of how this prayer,
so we'll have two examples.
First, in and asking
for intervention, what's
being implied in this
situation is there
something that we're afraid
of or that we don't trust.
And that brings up
the first question,
when did we forget to trust
in the process of life that's
unfolding before us?
When did we forget to trust
in the innate intelligence
within the body
of that child who
journey through
creation that come
through the womb of the
mother because their illness
or their fever is
frightening us?
When do we forget that?
Now, within that
context, the prayer
may become rather than saying
please help me do something,
would be the thought, feeling,
and emotion of the child
in greatest health.
And once that has
occurred, once we
have the feeling and the
thought and the emotion of what
this child is like in the
greatest state of health,
that's the seed.
From that point
forward, our prayer
now becomes a prayer
of thanks for what
we have created in our seed.
Let me give you another
example that might help
to flesh this out a little bit.
Back in the mid-1980s,
I spent some time
in northern New Mexico with a
Native American friend of mine
during a time of
one of the greatest
droughts the southwest
of the United States
has ever experienced.
And invited me to go
with him to his tribal,
an ancient tribal
location to pray rain.
And this is key, to pray
rain, not pray for rain.
Well, I went out
with an expectation
that I would see a lot
of dancing and movement
and chanting.
And a little bit to
my disappointment,
I stood off and watched this
gentleman walk to a tribal spot
where his family done it for
thousands of generations.
He took off his shoes,
walked into his stone circle,
and I saw very little outward
expression of the prayer.
And then he came back and
he said, well, I'm finished.
Let's go get a bite to eat.
And I said, well,
what about the prayer?
And he says, I just did it.
And I said, well, what happened?
I thought you were
going to pray for rain.
And he said, no.
If I pray for rain, I'm
acknowledging it doesn't exist
and it will never happen--
>> So the universe
answers, OK, you want rain?
We don't have rain here.
>> You're just
saying pray for rain.
He said, I prayed rain and what
that means to me is I went out
and I had the thoughts,
feelings, and emotions of what
it feels like to feel the
mud ooze between my toes
during the rainstorm
in my village.
He said, I smelled the smell
of the water coming off
the pueblo walls.
I felt what it feels like to
walk through fields of corn
up to my chest because
the rain is so plentiful.
And doing that, I created--
somewhere in creation--
I just created rain.
Maybe not here, somewhere.
Now, my prayer becomes a prayer
of thanks for what I've created
and I know that it
will come to pass.
Well, the next day, we
watched on the weather maps.
A jet stream dip
down, we had more rain
than we knew what
to do with and I
called him and I said, how
come we've got so much rain?
And he said, well,
that's the part
I haven't got figured out yet.
>> Yeah, but see, we don't want
to pray for something for it
to happen somewhere else.
We want it to happen here.
>> Right.
>> So where in his
prayer does he say,
please have it rain
here in New Mexico.
>> Well, it was.
It was in New Mexico
where we had that rain.
And this is the--
the prayer, this
last mode of prayer
in feeling the outcome before it
ever happens, and in that way,
creating it, that's the
language to creation.
It doesn't promise that
it will come to pass,
it creates the possibility--
that's the seed-- now, our
prayer is a prayer of thanks,
and our thanks is what
empowers that seed.
It gives it life so it
can last to come to pass.
This is what we lost
1,700 years ago.
In our world, if
we do a prayer, it
doesn't happen immediately
in front of us.
We say it never
happened because--
>> Because God's not listening.
>> Right, because
that's our expectation.
The ancients knew beyond
the shadow of a doubt
that they are empowered
in this world to create.
And the moment they had that
thought, feeling, and emotion,
it has happened somewhere,
they trusted that.
And we don't trust that now
up until very recently anyway.
In trusting that,
they would simply
continue maybe for days
with prayers of thanks
because they trusted
it come to pass.
So now, back to your example.
I would give thanks for
the health and the vitality
of my child who
in this moment may
be projecting an illusion
of illness through a body.
And I know that the soul is new,
shiny, and intact as the day it
burst forth from the heart of
the creator into this world
and there is no
illness in the soul,
that that body is simply
mirroring a process of learning
and understanding.
And I trust that process.
I trust that with all my heart.
And I asked, I give thanks
for the process and thanks
for the divinity that is
playing out in front of me.
And that's very
different than saying,
please help me do
something I'm afraid of,
I don't understand
what's happening here.
>> Let's suppose the child dies,
then how do you look at it?
>> Through the science
of compassion and through
redefining our relationship
with that child,
with the creative
forces of our world,
I'm not saying that
prayer changes,
I'm saying prayer redefines what
that experience means to us.
And in that redefinition,
it expands our opportunity
to love on levels--
according to ancient text,
we're in this world learning
to love on levels deeper than
even the angels in the heavens
have ever learned to love
because they've never
had to face what we're
facing here in this world.
>> You know, you say something
here in your book about
the dark knight of the soul.
You talk about, nobody ever
goes through the dark night,
this despairing type of
thing that many of us
have gone through
unless they have
reached some sort of mastery.
>> It's-- I attribute that quote
to every mother on the planet
because every mother, I believe,
in every culture says God will
never give you more than you
can handle on your plate.
I didn't know what that
meant when I was a child.
Now, seeing these ancient texts,
the dark night of the soul is
defined as a time that comes
in almost everyone's life--
unless you're very fortunate--
when everything that you've
ever loved or held dear is gone.
You might come home someday
and your family, your job,
your house, your car,
everything is gone.
And in that moment, we're
pushed to the very edge
of who we believe we are and
we're forced to reach within
to pull forth this wisdom that
allows us to gracefully move
through this time.
With the ancients to remind
us, and what now researchers
have discovered
digitally, and there's
a whole science behind
this, is that we're not
capable of having those
experiences, of losing health,
of losing finance, of
losing friends, and jobs,
and marriage.
It cannot happen until we have
amassed every tool that is
required to see us gracefully
through that experience.
And the key is we never know
when it's going to happen.
If there are big neon sign--
>> But many people--
>> --it would be
different, but there's not.
>> Many people keep everything.
They keep the wife, they keep
the car, they keep the money,
they keep the job, but
they're empty inside
and nothing has any meaning.
>> Yes, and if we--
and this is a very subtle,
it's a very powerful concept--
if we go through
the world feeling
that we must hold tight on
everything that we've ever
amassed in our lives, and that
we love, and that we hold dear,
that's creations
trigger and that's
the assurance that
we will lose them
at some point in our lives.
Rather than recognizing the
beauty and the gifts of all
that have ever come to
us, of our relationships,
our friendships, of
our jobs, our careers,
and honoring them
for what they are
and knowing that we
would always be OK
if they should all go away.
And when people say, well, but
I'm not OK, what would I do?
What would I do?
That is our invitation to
reach inside of ourselves
and find out, what is our fear?
Our fear that maybe we can't
do something else in life for
or that there's only
one person in the world
that we're ever
going to be with.
It invites us to redefine
what all of those experiences
mean in our lives.
So rather than
holding onto them,
we can love them greater by
honoring them for what they are
and what they bring to us.
Dark night of the soul happens
to most people at least once.
And it's interesting,
once people come through
on the other side, and
they see that they are OK,
and that they have
redefined their lives,
some people almost will say,
you know, that wasn't so bad.
I'm ready for another one.
They'll say, OK, creation,
let's see what you've got.
Bring it on.
>> I don't want anymore.
I had one.
>> I think we've all had ours.
And look how beautiful
you've come through it.
>> Yeah, well, I really have.
I really have.
I feel much more whole
as a result of it.
>> Well, what this tells
me, when people come to me
and share with me their stories
of health and relationship
and financial disasters,
the worse story,
there's this tremendous
propensity for balance
and creation and it takes a
master to upset that balance.
And the worse the story,
the greater the master that
I know that I'm in
the presence with.
>> Have you said to one
man who lost everything,
you said congratulations.
>> Congratulations, you've
just begun the dark knight
of the soul which can only
happen in the presence
of a master who has
all these tools.
>> So this praying that
you're talking about here,
it's very important in the
context of praying for world
peace that you pray
seeing it done.
>> For so many people, they're
viewing this time in history,
all the prophecies of doom and
destruction and all the unrest
that we see, if we're
choosing to change that,
we must change the
thought underlying it.
And praying from a place that
peace has already occurred
is the way to do that.
>> So you don't say
please bring peace.
>> Thanks for the peace.
>> You say thank you for the
peace and you picture peace.
>> Yes.
You feel peace in your body
and you recognize peace
and it's in the
world all around you.
>> Whatever the headlines.
>> Because there's
always peace around us.
>> Gregg, you're a fascinating
interviewee, fascinating man.
>> Thank you.
>> Brilliant man.
>> Thank you for the pleasure.
>> Well, we've been
talking to Gregg Braden.
He is the author
of a book called
"Walking Between The Worlds",
the science of compassion.
We learned a lot today.
Like I always tell you, I bring
you miracles on this show.
Keep coming back.